up to it three times. Sounds now as if it's a
rehearsal for a movie. Different story every
time. Okay. That's the way historians do. We
change the story with regularity. Start again
with the Officer's Candidate School. Explain why
that you were in Officer's Candidate School from
40 to 42. Well, it was because I was performing my
normal military service, which is a one and a half
year period in Sweden, normally, during the war.
It became longer. I was in for about three years.
And it seemed to me to make the best out of that time.
It would be most interesting to go to officer
school, particularly if I was interested in the
coast artillery, which combined the physical
interest of ballistics and mathematics and also
the contact with the sea. And the first contact
with the sea then that you experienced was really
from your home and not from the military? Oh yes, I
grew up on the ocean, on the beautiful bay of the
Baltic, which had very interesting natural
features and therefore attracted my interest
very much. What degrees did you receive from the
University of Stockholm prior to the doctoral
degree in science? Well, the way you work it in
Scandinavia, first you take your bachelor's
degree. And after that,
work your way toward what corresponds more or less
to a doctorate degree here, which is called
licentiate degree. And for a thesis in that
connection, I worked on the problem I found
fascinating. namely studies of sedimentation in
the past by using the type of deposit that occurs in
the glacial strata around Scandinavia, where you
can distinguish every single year and therefore
establish a chronology and study processes on an
absolute time basis. How do you distinguish every
year? Does it fall in layers like, you mean like a
tree reversed? Exactly like tree rings,
essentially, because in spring you get the flood,
the melting, and that gives rise to a specific type
of more coarse grain deposit, and in winter and
fall and winter, things slow down and the
character of the sediment, chemical character of
sediment is different. So therefore you get the
kind of tree ring-like effect, and you can measure
the thicknesses of these rings, and therefore
seek to reconstruct exactly the
different hydrologic conditions and metrologic
conditions during each year, and also use this
sequence as a timekeeper and measure things on an
absolute time basis. Is that what began the
Scandinavian's interest in deep sea drilling? I
wouldn't say so. So the deposits of this kind were
formed around the polar ice that covered
Scandinavia
during several ice ages. And it's the basis for
establishing the whole chronology for the ice
ages. And it gave me an interest, or it was an
exponent of my interest, putting geological
phenomena on an absolute quantitative basis. And
with that background, it then became very
interesting to go to the deep sea, where one knew
that the sedimentation was much, much smaller.
Instead of having a fraction of an inch for each
year, the
same thickness of sediment corresponded to many
thousand years. So you have the chance to extend
much, much further back in time. That's what
fascinated me first with deep sea geology.
Now,
when was your first expedition that began to
explore the sea in these terms, in terms of deep sea
drilling?
The first expeditions with that specific aim in
mind were a series of of preliminary test
expeditions in the North Sea and Skagerrak that
were initiated by the, taken by the Oceanographic
Institute in Göteborg. And I was lucky enough to
participate in these and also in the final
shakedown cruise to the Mediterranean.
preceding the culmination of these efforts in the
form of the Swedish deep-sea expedition with the
Albatross, 1947 to 1948. So the first major effort
preceding that was then the Skagerrak expedition
to the Mediterranean, called the Skagerrak
expedition because the ship's name was Skagerrak
in this case, in 1946. And then you were on the
Albatross in 1948. 47 to 48, 15 months. And then
when you come back from the Albatross, then you
work with the Swedish National Research Council
in compiling your data? Well, the National
Research Council provided essentially the
fellowship support and research grant for the
working up of the material collected from the East
Pacific during the Albatross expedition, which I
had been given the opportunity to use as a basis for
my
doctoral science thesis work. And when did you
first make contact with Americans in terms of
oceanographic work?
It's hard to pinpoint the first time. It must have
been in connection probably with the Skagerrak
expedition, the preliminaries leading to the
Albatross expedition. I developed
correspondence with many people in this country
who were interested in similar
problems, particularly the people at Woods Hall
and Lamont Geological Observatory, Morris Ewing
there.
several of the geologists in the country that were
not necessarily associated with oceanography,
but who were fascinated by these new
possibilities. And finally, and foremost, with
the staff here at Scripps Institutional
Oceanography, Roger Revelle, and some of the
other people working here. How did you manage to
come to Scripps?
It was a natural choice for what I thought would be a
maybe half a year or a year post-doctoral work.
After spending four years of working up the
material from the East Pacific, which showed some
very interesting previously unknown features,
it was fascinating enough. So I wanted to at least
devote a few more years to that problem. And the
logical place, the center in the world for Pacific
oceanographic studies was scripts, so that was an
obvious choice. And whom did you contact here? One
of the things that I found most inspiring in my
thesis work was the thesis by Roger Revelle that
had just then come out, quite strongly delayed
again by the war. It worked on material collected
by the American Carnegie expedition much
earlier. But the material had not been worked up
until
he started investigating it. And his monograph on
this is a very impressive piece of work, plus the
fact that he was the man who inspired and
controlled this place at the time made me write to
him. And? Well,
I didn't hear anything for, must have been half a
year. I think I wrote him in Christmas, around
Christmas time, 1940, 1951. I
spent the Christmas together with my wife's
family in Copenhagen and at the Bohr Institute.
And Niels Bohr. further encouraged me to take that
step and to go for a postdoctoral period here. He'd
also heard about Scripps. But sometime in May the
following year, I got a letter from a man whom I
didn't know at that time, but who since then has
become a great friend of mine, John D. Isaacs. And
he explained to me in his letter, which was rather
brief, that That day, a whole pile of papers had
fallen down from the director's desk. And he was
assistant to the director. And when he picked up
the papers, he found my letter among them. And he
felt he should answer some of the letters. And he
picked mine. And his answer was, yes, why don't you
come? That was all. I took that as an expression of
the informality and directness of approach to
science in the United States. and embarked on the
trip over. Now, obviously you stayed here now. Why
the change from research to professor? Was there
any...? At the time when I came here, Scripps
Institutional Oceanography was a kind of
exceptional institution in the university and
had very few faculty positions. They were very
difficult to get. So Roger Revelle, who wanted to
attract
new scientists to the institution at a much higher
rate than he could possibly get faculty positions
for, used research staff positions for this
purpose, and he offered such a position to me. And
then you worked on research, and then from there
you moved on into teaching when? Well, actually,
there's no border between teaching and research
in Scripps. I was teaching then insofar as we had
contact with students around here. And I'm doing
as much research after the change in title that you
referred to, which
didn't mean anything much in fact,
just more of an administrative arrangement that
you would call professor instead of research?
Well, what I'm interested in is what appears to be
biogeochemistry. Well, that thing stemmed from
partly the fact that in much of my work in the ocean
settlements, I had become to depend much on the
record provided by the fossils of organisms. They
provided a very rich, both chemical and
paleontological evidence to tell you where you
were and what had happened in the past. That is a
characteristic feature of the EBC settlements,
that they have a large proportion of tiny
skeletons of microscopic animals and plants. So
part of my geochemical work involved biological
questions And when Roger Revelle kindly wanted to
arrange for a professorship for me, he had to look
for the best strategic way of doing it. And he had
just succeeded in obtaining a million dollar
grant from the Rockefeller Foundation for the
rejuvenation of biology in script. And here he saw
me as a biologist suddenly. And in order to to be
able to incorporate this work I was doing in the
general scheme of things. He therefore called the
professorship
of biogeochemistry. Well, when one reads the way
you've approached work, it seems as if you begin as
a generalist and then you become a specialist in
And then you broaden out to be a journalist again.
Is that a fair description of your career? I'm
afraid that's the case, yes. Do you prefer to be a
journalist? Is that the way you conceive of the
role of a scientist? I think a scientist must renew
himself all the time. And to renew yourself, you
have to approach problems, new problems, and see
problems in a different perspective. You must
learn something about other branches of science.
And that has a great danger that you spread
yourself too thin. But the interesting thing is to
learn new things. And I'm afraid if you get too
specialized, then you might very well become an
authority, but life will eventually become
boring. Well, is oceanography especially suited
to the sort of journalist, specialist,
journalist approach as an academic discipline?
Yes. is, and I would say earth sciences in general,
because there's no barrier between
oceanography, earth sciences in general, and
from earth sciences in general, there's no
barrier between that and space science, and the
question of the laws that rule our universe or our
solar system. These diffused borders make a very
wide field, but it also makes it necessary to learn
a large number of things. Let me offer an
explanation before I ask the question. Many
American oceanographers, if that's fair to say,
began as meteorologists and moved into
oceanography through submarine warfare
training in one way or through meteorological
work in the Air Force, the other. Who do you think
are specifically? I'm thinking of people like
Spellhouse, for example, who is only an American
in terms of being naturalized, and those people
who trained with the Air Force with him. And the
other way, I'm thinking about people who moved out
of oceanography and into space like yourself.
Does there seem to be a blending together of
atmosphere, space, and the ocean? That's
certainly true, particularly for the people who
deal with... The physics of the ocean, the motion
of ocean currents, there is no particular
principle difference between the motion of the
fluid that forms atmosphere and the motion of the
fluid that forms the ocean. And if you can treat
one, you have the tools for treating the other. So
there's often a blend of atmospheric and and
oceanic sciences among these people. Ross Bue,
Walter Munk, John Isaacs, you see many others.
Now, is this what led you to turn your attention
towards space? What I'm trying to find out is what
specifically led you from the oceans to space. Oh,
I'd always been interested in that. And again, it
came much from the work of particularly One of my
ancestors, back in the 1870s,
was an Arctic explorer, but also very interested
in the question of interaction of the Earth with
space, the question of how the Earth had formed,
the dust that it had accreted from, and what
meteorites could tell us about the origin of the
solar system. And I was always fascinated by his
work.
In the deep sea sediments, you also find traces of
the influx of cosmic materials onto the Earth in
the form of fine cosmic dust that is not so diluted
in the deep sea as it is on land. And the work with
that then led me on still further into these
questions that I already earlier had been
interested in. And particularly the presence
here, we succeeded in attracting to Scripps one of
the great authorities in this field named
Professor Harold Urey. And everybody around
Harold Urey becomes enthusiastic by what he's
doing. That further catalyzed my interest in this
field. Okay. And so you seem to think it was natural
then to, if I may coin a word, to sort of relate the
sciences of the galaxy with the sciences of the
ocean? Or I would say the science of the solar
system with that of the ocean. The galaxy, as such,
is a step I haven't taken yet. Okay. Then what is the
Space Research Laboratory? Because that implies
galaxy to be. Well, you can divide space into near
space. Okay. And the solar system, which is
essentially our bound system, And then, as you
say, the galaxy, which is a much larger concept,
much more enormous. And I've never been,
or I've limited myself so far to the questions of
our solar system, particularly because with the
techniques that I'm using and the material that
I'm using, one has access essentially by
observation only to the, or mostly to the solar
system.
But I'm sorry, what's your question? What is the
Space Research Laboratory? Oh. The Space
Research Laboratory, again, was a convenience of
the time. There were several people at the time
here on campus. The campus was growing now under
Roger Revelle's direction. And we started to
accumulate on purpose many physicists and
chemists who were interested in Not only the
ocean, but the Earth as a whole and the solar system
and the universe. People like Harold Dury first,
Professor James Arnold, the Burbidges,
Professor Jeffrey and Margaret Burbidge. And
after a while, Professor McIlwain, for example,
has done lots of work on the Van Allen belts and the
radiation belts around the Earth. And it became a
practical... administrative matter to try to
pull all these things, all these people together
into some kind of organization that was very loose
and perhaps more consisted in a work than the Space
Research Institute, which then served as an
organization to deal with the outside world,
particularly the sponsoring agency that was
NASA.
What were your actions as director? That's what I
would like to find out. What kind of direction did
you try to give to the Space Institute?
Practically nothing. That was essentially...
The idea was to... I mean, at that time, scientists
were very individualistic, and there was no great
attempt to force everybody to do the same thing. So
the idea was that only one of Herb York, who was
chancellor at the time, to create an umbrella for
all of these people. And what I had to do was a
minimum of integration of results to present them
to the space agency to convince them that our
campus was a worthy recipient of further funding
and particularly student support.
What is the Institute for the Study of Matter?
Well, that is yet another interesting creation in
the early days of the expanded
campus here. Due to the arrival of the great solid
state physicist, Professor Bernd Matthias, who
is one of the foremost pioneers in the field,
particularly of material science in general, and
particularly superconductivity. And he was one
of our great catches. And again, he's a very
inspiring and brilliant man
who enthusiasmates everybody around him. And he
established, and then again for the purpose of
generating an umbrella for all activists in the
field, an institute called the Institute for the
Study of Matter. And I felt that I would like to
branch a little into that fundamental field to
learn more about the atomic molecular structure
of the solids that I depended on in my work. joined
in his effort in those early days.
Okay, now, your publications have concentrated
on the geology, chemistry, and physics of outer
space, interspersed with occasional articles on
marine geochemistry, if I understand it
correctly. Would you agree with that? And also
material science. And materials. Okay, right. I
would agree with that, certainly. Now, Is space
then a key to oceans for you or is space by itself for
you in terms of research? I see it all as an
interrelated system and the oceans are a very
interesting special phenomenon generated on
some of the planets due to the separation from the
primordial matter of water on the surface of the
planet and I like to understand the ocean partly as
it exists today and the processes it shows today,
partly as a recorder of the most immediate past
history of the Earth. That means the last
something like 100 million years, the very most
recent pages in the history of the Earth. But space
science has opened up for us questions that refer
to the very earliest history of the Earth that are
no longer recorded in any existing settlements
because they've been wiped out. And we can learn
from what we see on other planets and in material
that has not yet formed any planets. From that we
can learn where the ocean originally came from and
how it originally formed. Okay, good. What was the
American Chemical Society PRF award presented in
honor of in 1961? Oh, I guess it must have been in
response or some recognition of the work that
started with the work on the Deep Sea Expedition
and continued its scripts afterward, trying to
clear up some of the questions of the metabolism,
of the chemical metabolism of the ocean. and the
relationship between the
ocean sediments or the use of the ocean sediments
as a record of the
past history of the Earth.